DOCSP-30523: connection guide (#8)
mongodb/docs-rust: source/fundamentals/connections/connection-guide.txt

.. _rust-connect-to-mongodb:

================
Connection Guide
================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

This guide shows you how to connect to a MongoDB instance or replica set
deployment using the {+driver-short+}.

.. _rust-connection-uri:

--------------
Connection URI
--------------

A **connection URI**, also known as a connection string, tells the
driver how to connect to MongoDB and how to behave while connected.

Parts of a Connection URI
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following example explains each part of a sample connection URI:

.. figure:: /includes/figures/connection_uri_parts.png

>    :alt: Part of a connection string

Reviewer: Suggestion:

I think the alt text should match the terminology by which it was introduced.

```suggestion
   :alt: Part of a connection URI
```

In this example, we use ``mongodb`` for the protocol, which specifies the
:manual:`Standard Connection String Format
</reference/connection-string/#std-label-connections-standard-connection-string-format>`.
You can also use the :manual:`DNS Seed List Connection Format
</reference/connection-string/#dns-seed-list-connection-format>` if you
want more flexibility in your deployment and the ability to change the
servers in rotation without reconfiguring clients.

The next part of the connection string contains your username and, if
you are using password-based authentication, your password. Replace the value of
``user`` with your username and ``pass`` with your password. If you are using an
authentication mechanism that does not require a username and password, omit
this part of the connection URI.

> The next part of the connection string specifies the hostname or IP address and

Author: changed for both

port of your MongoDB instance. In the preceding example, we use ``sample.host``
as the hostname and ``27017`` as the port. Replace these values to point to
your MongoDB instance.

The last part of the connection string specifies connection and authentication
options. In the example, we set two connection options:
``maxPoolSize=20`` and ``w=majority``.

.. TODO To learn more about connection
.. options, see the :ref:`rust-connection-options` reference.

Connection Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To connect to MongoDB, you need to create a client. A client manages
your connections and runs database commands.

> .. tip:: Reuse Your Client

Author: moved to a new section -- calling it `The Client Type` but that sounds a little awkward. feedback welcome

> .. tip:: Reuse Your Client

Reviewer: From the [style guide](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/meta/style-guide/style/titles-and-headings/#style-and-structure):

> Include articles, prepositions, and punctuation as needed for clarity. However, avoid using an article (a, an, or the) as the first word.

Suggestion:

I think "MongoDB Client" could be descriptive enough and would avoid having to focus only on the Client struct, and be a reusable header name across driver docs.

   
   We recommend that you reuse your client across sessions and operations.
   You can use the same ``Client`` instance to perform multiple tasks, instead of
   creating a new one each time. The ``Client`` type is safe for
   concurrent use by multiple threads or async tasks.
   
   .. TODO To learn more about how connection pools work in the driver, see

>    .. the :ref:`FAQ page <rust-faq-connection-pool>`.

Author: Perhaps this content could live in the planned performance considerations page?

>    .. the :ref:`FAQ page <rust-faq-connection-pool>`.

Reviewer: Ok sure. I would suggest creating a separate ticket so that we could consider the priority/effort separately rather than adding it onto the existing one.

The following code shows how you can create a client that uses an Atlas
connection string and the {+stable-api+} version, connect to MongoDB, and
verify that the connection is successful. Select from the
:guilabel:`Sync` or :guilabel:`Async` tabs below for corresponding
connection code samples.

.. TODO To learn more about asynchronous and synchronous runtimes, see the
.. :ref:`Runtimes <TODO link>` guide.

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: Async
      :tabid: rust-async

      .. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/connection-async.rs
         :language: rust

   .. tab:: Sync
      :tabid: rust-sync

      .. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/connection-sync.rs
         :language: rust

.. .. tip::
.. 
..    TODO Follow the :ref:`Quick Start guide <rust-connect-to-your-cluster>`
..    to retrieve your Atlas connection string.

.. note::

   To learn about connecting to Atlas Serverless, see the
   :ref:`Serverless Instance Limitations page
   <atlas-serverless-drivers>` to identify the minimum driver version
   you need.

--------------------------------
Other Ways to Connect to MongoDB
--------------------------------

> If you are connecting to a single MongoDB server instance or replica set
> that is not hosted on Atlas, see the following sections to find out how to

Reviewer: Suggestion:

I think the actual connection process isn't happening at the same time.

```suggestion
If you need to connect to a single MongoDB server instance or replica set
that is not hosted on Atlas, see the following sections to find out how to
```

connect.

Connect to a MongoDB Server on Your Local Machine
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. include:: /includes/localhost-connection.rst

To test whether you can connect to your server, replace the connection
string with your localhost connection string in the preceding code example.

Connect to a Replica Set
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A MongoDB replica set deployment is a group of connected instances that

> store the same set of data. This configuration provides data

Author: reworded for clarity

.. _rust-connect-to-mongodb:

================
Connection Guide
================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

This guide shows you how to connect to a MongoDB instance or replica set
deployment using the {+driver-short+}.

.. _rust-connection-uri:

--------------
Connection URI
--------------

A **connection URI**, also known as a connection string, tells the
driver how to connect to MongoDB and how to behave while connected.

Parts of a Connection URI
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following example explains each part of a sample connection URI:

.. figure:: /includes/figures/connection_uri_parts.png
   :alt: Parts of a connection URI

In this example, we use ``mongodb`` for the protocol, which specifies the
:manual:`Standard Connection String Format
</reference/connection-string/#std-label-connections-standard-connection-string-format>`.
You can also use the :manual:`DNS Seed List Connection Format
</reference/connection-string/#dns-seed-list-connection-format>` if you
want more flexibility in your deployment and the ability to change the
servers in rotation without reconfiguring clients.

> The part of the connection string after the protocol contains your username and, if
> you are using password-based authentication, your password. Replace the value of

Reviewer: Suggestion:

I can't think of a case in which you provide a username but no password for any authentication mechanism. If this is true, perhaps this sentence could be simplified:

```suggestion
If you are using password-based authentication, the part of the connection string after the protocol contains your username and password. Replace the placeholder for
```

set with these specifications:

.. code-block:: none

   mongodb://host1:27017,host2:27017,host3:27017/?replicaSet=myRS

When connecting to a replica set, the driver takes the following actions by default:

- Discovers all replica set members when given the address of any one member.
- Dispatches operations to the appropriate member, such as instructions
  to write against the **primary** node. To learn more about the replica
  set primary, see :manual:`Replica Set Primary </core/replica-set-primary/>` in the Server manual.

.. tip::

   You only need to specify one host to connect to a replica set.
   However, to ensure connectivity when the specified host
   is unavailable, you should provide the full list of hosts.

Direct Connection
`````````````````

To force operations on the host designated in the connection URI,
specify the ``directConnection`` option. Direct connections display the
following behavior:

- They don't support SRV strings.
- They fail on writes when the specified host is not the primary.
- They require you to :manual:`specify a secondary read preference
  </core/read-preference/#mongodb-readmode-secondary>` when the

>   specified host isn't the primary. To learn more about replica set
>   secondaries, see :manual:`Replica Set Secondary Members </core/replica-set-secondary/>` in the Server manual.

Reviewer: Suggestion:

I think "replica set secondaries", which I would call "replica set secondary members" to stay consistent with the terminology, haven't been introduced yet, so it could be good to clarify what they are called. I think the clarification could be combined with the "Learn more" sentence by using the demonstrative pronoun "these":

```suggestion
  specified host isn't the primary member. To learn more about these replica set
  members, see :manual:`Replica Set Secondary Members </core/replica-set-secondary/>` in the Server manual.
```

this part of the connection URI.

The part of the connection string after the credentials specifies the
hostname or IP address and port of your MongoDB instance. In the
preceding example, we use ``sample.host`` as the hostname and ``27017``
as the port. Replace these values to point to your MongoDB instance.

The last part of the connection string specifies connection and authentication
options. In the example, we set two connection options:
``maxPoolSize=20`` and ``w=majority``.

.. TODO To learn more about connection
.. options, see the :ref:`rust-connection-options` reference.

MongoDB Client
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To connect to MongoDB, you need to create a ``Client`` instance. A
client manages your connections and runs database commands.

.. tip:: Reuse Your Client
   
   We recommend that you reuse your client across sessions and operations.
   You can use the same ``Client`` instance to perform multiple tasks, instead of
   creating a new one each time. The ``Client`` type is safe for
   concurrent use by multiple threads or async tasks.
   
   .. TODO To learn more about how connection pools work in the driver, see
   .. the :ref:`FAQ page <rust-faq-connection-pool>`.

> You can create a client that uses your connection string and other

Reviewer 2: There's also the shorthand `Client::with_uri_str` method if they don't need to set anything directly on the `ClientOptions` struct.
